# Futures, Tasks, and Threads

As we saw in the previous chapter, threads provide one approach to concurrency.
We have seen another approach to concurrency in this chapter, using async with
futures and streams. You might be wondering why you would choose one or the
other. The answer is: it depends! And in many cases, it is not threads *or*
async but rather threads *and* async.

Many operating systems have supplied threading-based concurrency models for
decades now, and many programming languages have support for them as a result.
However, they are not without their tradeoffs. On many operating systems, they
use a fair bit of memory for each thread, and they come with some overhead for
starting up and shutting down. Threads are also only an option when your
operating system and hardware support them! Unlike mainstream desktop and mobile
computers, some embedded systems do not have an OS at all, so they also do not
have threads!

The async model provides a different—and ultimately complementary—set of
tradeoffs. In the async model, concurrent operations do not require their own
threads. Instead, they can run on tasks, as when we used `trpl::spawn_task` to
kick off work from a synchronous function throughout the streams section. A task
is a lot like a thread—but instead of being managed by the operating system, it
is managed by library-level code: the runtime.

In the previous section, we saw that we could build a `Stream` by using an async
channel and spawning an async task which we could call from synchronous code. We
could do the exact same thing with a thread! In Listing 17-40, we used
`trpl::spawn_task` and `trpl::sleep`. In Listing 17-41, we replace those with
the `thread::spawn` and `thread::sleep` APIs from the standard library in the
`get_intervals` function.

<Listing number="17-41" caption="Using the `std::thread` APIs instead of the async `trpl` APIs for the `get_intervals` function" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
{{#rustdoc_include ../listings/ch17-async-await/listing-17-41/src/main.rs:threads}}
```

</Listing>

If you run this, the output is identical. And notice how little changes here
from the perspective of the calling code! What is more, even though one of our
functions spawned an async task on the runtime and the other spawned an
OS thread, the resulting streams were unaffected by the differences.

However, there is a significant difference between these two approaches behave,
although we might have a hard time measuring it in this very simple example. We
could spawn hundreds of thousands or even millions of async tasks on any modern
personal computer. If we tried to do that with threads, we would literally run
out of memory!

However, there is a reason these APIs are so similar. Threads act as a boundary
for sets of synchronous operations; concurrency is possible *between* threads.
Tasks act as a boundary for sets of *asynchronous* operations; concurrency is
possible both *between* and *within* tasks. In that regard, tasks are kind of
like lightweight, runtime-managed threads with added capabilities that come from
being managed by a runtime instead of by the operating system. Futures are an
even more granular unit of concurrency, where each future may represent a tree
of other futures. That is, the runtime—specifically, its executor—manages tasks,
and tasks manage futures.

However, this does not mean that async tasks are always better than threads, any
more than that threads are always better than tasks.

On the one hand, concurrency with threads is in some ways a simpler programming
model than concurrency with `async`. Threads are somewhat “fire and forget,”
they have no native equivalent to a future, so they simply run to completion,
without interruption except by the operating system itself. That is, they have
no *intra-task concurrency* like futures can. Threads in Rust also have no
mechanisms for cancellation—a subject we have not covered in depth in this
chapter, but which is implicit in the fact that whenever we ended a future, its
state got cleaned up correctly.

These limitations make threads harder to compose than futures. It is much more
difficult, for example, to build something like the `timeout` we built in
[“Building Our Own Async Abstractions”][combining-futures], or the `throttle`
method we used with streams in [“Composing Streams”][streams]. The fact that
futures are richer data structures means they *can* be composed together more
naturally, as we have seen.

Tasks then give *additional* control over futures, allowing you to choose where
and how to group them. And it turns out that threads and tasks often work very
well together, because tasks can (at least in some runtimes) be moved around
between threads. We have not mentioned it up until now, but under the hood the
`Runtime` we have been using, including the `spawn_blocking` and `spawn_task`
functions, is multithreaded by default! Many runtimes use an approach called
*work stealing* to transparently move tasks around between threads based on the
current utilization of the threads, with the aim of improving the overall
performance of the system. To build that actually requires threads *and* tasks,
and therefore futures.

As a default way of thinking about which to use when:

- If the task is *very parallelizable*, like processing a bunch of data where
  each part can be processed separately, threads are a better choice.
- If the task is *very concurrent*, like handling messages from a bunch of
  different sources which may come in a different intervals or different rates,
  async is a better choice.

And if you need some mix of parallelism and concurrency, you do not have to
choose between threads and async. You can use them together freely, letting each
one serve the part it is best at. For example, Listing 17-TODO shows a fairly
common example of this kind of mix in real-world Rust code.

<!-- TODO: extract into a listing file! -->

<Listing number="17-TODO" caption="Sending messages with blocking code in a thread and awaiting the messages in an async block" file-name="src/main.rs">

```rust
# extern crate trpl; // for mdbook test
#
use std::{thread, time::Duration};

fn main() {
    let (tx, mut rx) = trpl::channel();

    thread::spawn(move || {
        for i in 1..11 {
            tx.send(i).unwrap();
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_secs(1));
        }
    });

    trpl::run(async {
        while let Some(message) = rx.recv().await {
            println!("{message}");
        }
    });
}
```

</Listing>

We begin by creating an async channel. Then we spawn a thread which takes
ownership of the sender side of the channel. Within the thread, we send the
numbers 1 through 10, and sleep for a second in between each. Finally, we run a
future created with an async block passed to `trpl::run` just like we have
throughout the chapter. In that future, we await those messages, just like in
the other message-passing examples we have seen.

To return to the examples we opened the chapter with: you could imagine running
a set of video encoding tasks using a dedicated thread, since video encoding is
compute bound, but notifying the UI that those operations are done with an async
channel. Examples of this kind of mix abound!

## Summary

This isn’t the last you’ll see of concurrency in this book: the project in
Chapter 21 will use the concepts in this chapter in a more realistic situation
than the smaller examples discussed here—and compare more directly what it looks
like to solve these kinds of problems with threading vs. with tasks and futures.

Whether with threads, with futures and tasks, or with the combination of them
all, Rust gives you the tools you need to write safe, fast, concurrent
code—whether for a high-throughput web server or an embedded operating system.

Next, we’ll talk about idiomatic ways to model problems and structure solutions
as your Rust programs get bigger. In addition, we’ll discuss how Rust’s idioms
relate to those you might be familiar with from object-oriented programming.


[combining-futures]: ch17-04-more-ways-of-combining-futures.md#building-our-own-async-abstractions
[streams]: ch17-05-streams.md#composing-streams
